Executive Order 8802: Prohibition of Discrimination in the Defense Industry (1941) | National Archives

Top

Skip to main content

The U.S. National Archives Home

Citizen Archivists
 ·

Bookmark/Share

 ·

Contact Us

Search

Search

Main menu

Research Our Records

Veterans' Service Records

Educator Resources

Visit Us

America's Founding Documents

Milestone Documents

Home
 > Executive Order 8802: Prohibition of Discrimination in the Defense Industry (1941) 

Milestone Documents

Complete List of Documents

Executive Order 8802: Prohibition of Discrimination in the Defense Industry (1941)

Enlarge

Download Link

Citation: Executive Order 8802 dated June 25, 1941, in which President Franklin D. Roosevelt prohibits discrimination in the defense program; 6/25/1941; Executive Orders, 1862 - 2011; General Records of the United States Government, Record Group 11; National Archives Building, Washington, DC.

View All Pages in the National Archives Catalog

View Transcript

In June of 1941, President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8802, banning discriminatory employment practices by federal agencies and all unions and companies engaged in war-related work. The order also established the Fair Employment Practices Commission to enforce the new policy.

In early 1941, millions of jobs were being created, primarily in urban areas, as the United States prepared for World War II. When large numbers of African Americans moved to cities in the north and west to work in defense industries, they were often met with violence and discrimination.

In response, A. Philip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and other Black leaders, met with Eleanor Roosevelt and members of the President’s cabinet. Randolph presented a list of grievances regarding the civil rights of African Americans, demanding that an executive order be issued to stop job discrimination in the defense industry. Randolph, with others, threatened that they were prepared to bring "ten, twenty, fifty thousand Negroes on the White House lawn" if their demands were not met.

In reaction to the fear of tens of thousands—if not more—African Americans marching on the nation’s capitol, and after consultation with his advisers, Roosevelt responded to the Black leaders and issued Executive Order 8802 on June 25th. It declared, "There shall be no discrimination in the employment of workers in defense industries and in Government, because of race, creed, color, or national origin." It was the first Presidential directive on race since Reconstruction. In exchange for Executive Order 8802, Randolph called off the march, though he would be a driving force of the 1963 March on Washington.

To investigate “complaints of discrimination in violation of the provisions of this order” Executive Order 8802 established the “Committee on Fair Employment Practice.” More commonly known as the Fair Employment Practice Committee (FEPC), it has been disregarded by most historians as a powerless and ineffectual agency, especially in the South. After World War II, the FEPC almost became a permanent agency, but a strong voting bloc in Congress prevented it. Shortly after the dismantling of the FEPC, President Truman issued 
Executive Order 9981
 banning segregation in the military.

Teach with this document.

This document is available on DocsTeach,
 the online tool for teaching with documents from the National Archives. Find teaching activities that incorporate this document, or 
create your own online activity
.

Previous Document

Next Document

Transcript

Reaffirming Policy Of Full Participation In The Defense Program By All Persons, Regardless Of Race, Creed, Color, Or National Origin, And Directing Certain Action In Furtherance Of Said Policy

June 25, 1941

WHEREAS it is the policy of the United States to encourage full participation in the national defense program by all citizens of the United States, regardless of race, creed, color, or national origin, in the firm belief that the democratic way of life within the Nation can be defended successfully only with the help and support of all groups within its borders; and

WHEREAS there is evidence that available and needed workers have been barred from employment in industries engaged in defense production solely because of considerations of race, creed, color, or national origin, to the detriment of workers' morale and of national unity:

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the statutes, and as a prerequisite to the successful conduct of our national defense production effort, I do hereby reaffirm the policy of the United States that there shall be no discrimination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race, creed, color, or national origin, and I do hereby declare that it is the duty of employers and of labor organizations, in furtherance of said policy and of this order, to provide for the full and equitable participation of all workers in defense industries, without discrimination because of race, creed, color, or national origin;

And it is hereby ordered as follows:

1. All departments and agencies of the Government of the United States concerned with vocational and training programs for defense production shall take special measures appropriate to assure that such programs are administered without discrimination because of race, creed, color, or national origin;

2. All contracting agencies of the Government of the United States shall include in all defense contracts hereafter negotiated by them a provision obligating the contractor not to discriminate against any worker because of race, creed, color, or national origin;

3. There is established in the Office of Production Management a Committee on Fair Employment Practice, which shall consist of a chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President. The Chairman and members of the Committee shall serve as such without compensation but shall be entitled to actual and necessary transportation, subsistence and other expenses incidental to performance of their duties. The Committee shall receive and investigate complaints of discrimination in violation of the provisions of this order and shall take appropriate steps to redress grievances which it finds to be valid. The Committee shall also recommend to the several departments and agencies of the Government of the United States and to the President all measures which may be deemed by it necessary or proper to effectuate the provisions of this order.

Franklin D. Roosevelt

 The White House,

 June 25, 1941.

 This page was last reviewed on February 8, 2022.

Contact us with questions or comments
.

Documents that Forged a Nation

Learn More

 Archives.gov

Information For…

Citizen Archivists

Federal Employees

Genealogists

Members of Congress

Preservation

Records Managers

The Press

Publications

Today's 
Federal Register

Prologue Magazine

Subscribe to Email Newsletters

Blogs

All Publications

Orgs. & Offices

Center for Legislative Archives

Federal Records Center

Office of the Federal Register

Office of the Inspector General

Presidential Libraries

Staff Directory

About Us

What is the National Archives?

National Archives by the Numbers

Doing Business with Us

Plans and Reports

Open Government

Our Plain Language Activities

I Want To…

Get My Military Record

Plan a Research Visit

Visit the National Archives

View Online Exhibits

Apply for a Grant

Research Presidential Records

View Highlights from Our Holdings

Participate

Attend an Event

Donate to the Archives

Work at the Archives

Volunteer at the Archives

Celebrate Freedom 250

Resources

A-Z Index

America's Founding Docs

Contact Us

Social Media

En Español

FAQs

Forms

Shop Online

Visit the National Archives Store

Buy Reproductions and Microfilm

Connect With Us

Facebook

X

Instagram

Tumblr

YouTube

Blogs

Flickr

Contact Us
 · 
Accessibility
 · 
Privacy Policy
 · 
Freedom of Information Act
 · 
No FEAR Act
 · 
USA.gov

The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration

1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272

Top

Modal Title
 -->

×

Close

 -->